Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopez, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Adam Saffron. He's research
fellow at the L and Discovery Institute at Tufts
University, and he is also leading an interdisciplinary research.
Program at the Institute for Advanced Consciousness Studies. And
today, we're going to talk about consciousness, intelligence, psychedelics,
the self, and some other related topics. So Evan,
welcome to the show. It's a huge pleasure to
everyone.
So happy to be talking with you.
So before we get into specific topics, let me
just ask you because it seems to me that
the research you do is very multidisciplinary and you
have many different kinds of approaches for some topics,
you have, for example, developmental and evolutionary approaches, then
you also apply neuro phenomenology or neuroscience plus phenomenology,
and then you also have embodied cognition. So, Um,
what is the sort of framework that you adopt
in your work when it comes to studying the
mind, exactly?
I guess some of my biggest influences would be
um uh. It's like people like uh Nietzsche, um
George Lakoff, um, many others, but basically, um, you
might call it um heterarchical perspectivism. And it's like,
you know, um, all models are wrong, some models
are useful, and all analogies are wrong, some analogies
are useful. And basically, um, trying to like view
different frameworks as different ways of getting purchase on
this like crossword puzzle, each one constraining the other,
each one having um different uh constraints and affordances,
which are non-overlapping and so their strengths and weaknesses,
you can kind of compliment them. And the goal
being to try to be as precise as possible.
WHILE also trying to be a little bit, but
not too playful about it. So it's like, you
know, so this model, you know, so here's one
perspective and it gets you this far. Here's another
perspective, it gets you this far, and they both
converge in these ways and they don't converge in
that ways and just bootstrapping, filling in the crossword
puzzle, moving around places where I have more or
less purchase and trying to understand things. Um, THE
other thing I would say would be something I
call um Uh, Marian bio phenomenology, which is a
terrible name. But basically, like David Mar said, like,
you can understand like any like um cognitive system,
uh, on these like three supervenient levels of analysis
of like. A functional computational level, like what is
a system like trying to do or the computations
it performs like what, what's its purpose, um, and
implementation slash mechanistic level of like the physics of
how it gets it done, and some sort of
like algorithmic abstraction layer in between. And so, um,
so that I butchered a little bit, but like
roughly like this is, um, this idea of like
looking at these multiple compatible levels of analysis and
cross-referencing across those and using those as sources of
constraints, and then pointing those at the at the
phenomena of interest and the explanum you want to
explain. So like, uh, so basically, taking on multiple
points of view from different frameworks, um, trying to
stay faithful to them, but not too faithful, but
faithful. And then, um. And at any given point
recognizing that there are always multiple levels of analysis
which are All true in their own domains and
their own scopes, um, and all wrong and true
within their scopes, and then, um, moving in and
out, uh, based on what's most useful. It's kind
of um Eric Cole, I think, like talks about
this well with some of his work on like
a causal emergence of like, it's like almost like,
what's the right course screening of a system like
you have an aperture that you sort of move
in and out so you get the most purchase
and explanation. So that was a lot, but like,
I don't know quite how I sum it up,
but it's like, um, Uh Whatever works while trying
to be principled.
Yeah. OK, fair, fair enough. So, uh, and with
that in mind, how do you approach the study
of consciousness?
USING this like taking on multiple points of view,
uh, zooming in and out at different course screenings
and considering multiple levels of analysis as, um, potentially
being supervenient or um compatible or complementary. Um, I
basically have tried to over the years, like just
like everyone else, I'm interested in my own consciousness,
interested in theories of consciousness. So just reading widely,
and um I did an apparently strange thing, uh,
which I find to be strange that more people
have done like I'm meeting more people who have
done it, but it's like surprisingly few. It's like,
what if instead of just like taking like one
perspective, saying this is the one, and then like,
like digging in your heels and defending turf, the
standard academic thing. Uh, WHAT if you took the
multiple perspectives and you try to like cross reference
them and like use and then bring in multiple
points of view, you know, you have to be
careful, obviously, because, you know, It's not, I don't
want to go, you know, postmodern fully on this.
It's like, it's not everything is everything here. And
you, you know, there's like really like, you can
break the thing if you like relax assumptions and
things like that you can, you can end up
in BS territory if you're not careful in a
hurry. So it's like, but that being said, um,
what if like all of these brilliant people are
actually all brilliant and actually seeing different sides of
the elephant? And what if they should just talk
to each other more and listen to each other
more. Just saying. And so, like, for instance, um,
when it came to consciousness, like, OK, um, there's
this like group like in great information theory, like,
this is very compelling in some respects. I don't
know about that, but yeah, yeah, yeah, amazingly brilliant
people. He's like, you know, I have points of
agreement, discrimin same thing like uh the global neuron
workspace uh crowd. Yep. Absolutely, um, and I would
say that for actually almost all the theories of
consciousness and, you know, I even get weird, you
know, like, I personally, for instance, like, uh, to
go most exotic, like I go all the way
to like, you know, um, orchestrated reduction and like
Quantum consciousness, like, I personally don't believe in that
because like I think actually like Tegmark. I believe
his proof that like, or his, his claims that
like the thermal conditions aren't right. It isn't quantum
physics giving ground to consciousness, but the idea that
there's something deep about the quantum intuition when it
comes to consciousness, and we should take it seriously,
and this should be one of our like constraints
and sense making like. Like a very qualified thumbs
up. And then like, so, but to like, the
main focus though would be trying to focus on
the theories that they have the largest communities around
them and have the strongest synergies and then moving
out from there as the goal being basically a
common like nexus of Uh, collaborations and sense and
sense making. So the, the big dogs of like
integrated information theory, global normal workspace theory, it's like,
you know, they're in this like adversarial collaboration, like
who's right. It's like, um, guys, um. You're not
even using words the same way. So like no
one listens to anyone. So it's like, so integrated
information theory, they're talking about, um, consciousness, uh, uh,
qua experienceuala. They're talking about like, what would it
take to have something like a Quala generator? Like
what it feels like in all the particulars of
the fields. Uh, WORKSPACE theory, like sometimes it's like
practically illusionist. They're talking about conscious access. They're talking
about the ability to report on experience, to, you
know, to have access to manipulate, to be aware
of it, you know, and then everything's like, you
know, things like metaverse. Like people are basically, um,
I guess engaging in something I call like the
Humpty Dumpty fallacy, and it kind of brings us
back to like naturesche, like assuming there's like one,
like, I think people are just confused about language.
They think words are these like 1 to 1
mappings on the pointers in the platonic forms like
it's just like gifted to us by God. It's
like, no, no, we had to like negotiate this.
It's a hot mess. These language games are playing.
And but there's a, so basically, Um, like, the
words have multiple meanings we're getting confused, but like,
um, The way people tend to use language though
is also a guide to how we ought to
proceed. So for instance, I'm rambling, but like the
idea, for instance, it's like, OK, so, um, It's
important that like IT is talking about phenomenal consciousness
and GMWT is talking about conscious access. And so
like, they're talking, there's no need for them to
even argue necessarily because they're talking about different things
of like consciousness potentially being understandable as this set
of like Um, phenomenon that you can unpack at
different levels. And you can use the same word,
and, and the common use is informative. But the
differences are also informative. So for instance, OK. So,
but, um, OK, so. So something like, like the
stream of experience, like basically you might say like
creature consciousness or like, um, the what it feels
like being unpacked from moment to moment, the appearance
of a lived world to you of appearance of
a world to you from a point of view
with a lived body at its center. Like, OK,
that's one thing and that's like the thing I
tend to focus on. Like what is it about
a biological system understood in terms of its biophysics,
in terms of a, um, and also in terms
of, um, uh, principles from like machine learning and
probability theory as an abstract understanding of them, what
is it that might allow a physical system. To
give you basically a first-person ontology from a 3rd,
lets you move from a third person to a
first-person ontology, get a subjective point of view on
a lived world and specifically a world of experience.
But then there's other ways that um we we
want to talk about consciousness, like, for instance, like
uh like like the phenomenologists say like, um, in
time consciousness, like the speech is present. That's, that's
an important explanum too. Um, THERE'S also things like
Um, consciousness in terms of, um, uh, meta-awareness and
to be aware of your own experience and be
self-reflexive. That's its own beast. And so it's basically
like there's a, it makes sense that there's a
common word that's pointing at all these things, but
it's kind of like an onion that you can
unpack at different levels or like a, like a
tree that grows. So anyways, so the basic idea
is what I do is I try to basically
take all the theories seriously. Um Cross reference them.
And keep cross referencing them to basically create like
a kind of Venn diagram slash tree of and
use and keep adding words while trying to use
words as consistently as possible to say, here's roughly
the range of phenomena of the things that are
interesting to us about consciousness that we want to
explain and how can we do it. OK.
So, so I, I mean, but you mentioned the
integrated information theory and global net neuronal workspace theories
of consciousness, but in your work, you also integrate
them or try to integrate them or combine them
with the free energy principle and the active inference
framework.
And so, um, yeah, so that brings to the
table its own set of perspectives, for instance, on,
um, so for instance, like, um, things like, um,
life mind continuity, like the nature of like, um,
how intelligence systems are cybernetic systems, um, and living
systems and like the minds that we think of
now and like cognitive processes, we think of, these
are, um, fruits of the tree of evolution, and
they evolve and they develop. And so that's oftentimes
neglected within the theories of consciousness. It's like, um,
You know, each one's own view on the elephant,
but the, the developmentalist perspective, the evolutionist perspective. And
so basically I focused on the free energy principle
and active inference framework, IT and GMWT as a
starting like place of like, bring these things together
as basically like an inner kernel and then I
elaborate in a series of papers, trying to basically
unfold the various phenomena that different theorists talk about.
Within this like inner kernel as a kind of
minimal unifying model for understanding consciousness and basically like
a scaffolding which you can just keep layering on
things, because we want to avoid like a, like
a, like a postmodern like morass, you know, it's
like it has to be like a precise structure
to work with. And so the idea was like
focusing on these three theories and they like, they're
different complementary features. So for instance, like the free
energy principle has aspirations of being a theory of
everything. So does IT in a way, but there
they have differences. So it's like IT has, it's
like the view of a system from its own
point of view and kind of it's like intrinsic
ontology. Well, the energy principle is also a theory
of everything, but it's more of like both intrinsic
and a relational ontology, and they have like similar
scopes and then like basically say, OK, how do
these theories talk to each other? How can they
talk to each other? Where do they overlap? And
so then, uh, global workspace theory entering specifically this
idea that so cognitive systems of um Of the
of they have many of the properties that we
would, uh, talk about it in terms of consciousness.
Uh, AND, and some of the reasons we think
brains are able to do the job of, um,
Uh, potentially of, uh, giving rise to something like
consciousness. The idea is that, um, the brain might
have a certain type of, uh, structure or architecture,
which is particularly good for allowing for a particular
kind of, uh, computation or, um, emergent functioning to
happen. So from a global workspace perspective, um, they
talk about having a bunch of specialist systems which
each has their own particular point of view in
the world. And that these can come together for
a whole experience in their parts in a workspace
where they can become mutually legible to each other
and they can, you can get this informational synergy
by all these specialist processes can, um, uh, project
or broadcast or can send their information this like
blackboard system. And these, these ideas originally came from
computer science and like ways of like constructing like,
uh, complex cognitive systems, but these then inspired theories
of consciousness. And so, so global workspace theory, um,
the idea is that you're looking for a kind
of architecture that allows you to have, um, local
specialist processes that can coordinate within the shared workspace
and then give you a kind of informational synergy,
a whole that's greater than some of its parts.
Now, I don't think on its own, this is
an adequate theory of consciousness. I think it's like
there's many aspects of neural functioning and, and like
there's It engages very deeply, like, for instance, with
like, um, uh, the neuroscience, the cognitive neuroscience literature,
um, much more so than ingrained information theory does.
And so that's like the virtue of it is
it's actually engaging with psychology and it's engaging with
some computer science concepts. So that's the workspace theory.
Um, INTEGRATED information theory brings something different to the
table, and it, it, it gets us in a
way closer to like the physics and the biophysics
and more in terms of like what kind of
specific network properties might you need. To be able
to um pull off the trick of a different
type of informational synergy. So it's going to be
hard to summarize both IAT and GWT here, but
it's like, um, and I like a series of
talks where I try to go into them, their
different shapes, but like, you know, really the theorists
should just speak to themselves. And then what I've
tried to do is basically, I claim these theories
are actually legible to each other. And you just
have to have like, I try to basically provide
a guide to this to say, OK, Now, like,
let's just read the theorist of what they're saying,
and now let's cross reference and here's the mapping
I think that works. And then we move from
there. And so, so the free energy principle, um,
basically brings in something else in addition to basically,
hard to explain, but the free energy principle, um,
These ideas like the Bayesian brain or perception is
a kind of inference. So like, you know, Anil
Seth talks about this very well. It's like, um,
your conscious experience is a kind of um grounded
hallucination or like, um, um, or it goes back
to say like Helmholtz or your perceptions kind of
inference to the best guess of the cause of
what's there, like, like you're if you actually look
at the sense that you're getting. When I look
out into the world, to the extent I'm not
just like imagining things, but like when you look
out into the world, like, you only have a
thumbnail arm's length, and you move your hand around,
and that's all the actual data is coming in.
But you're actually getting the experience perhaps of this
more complete sensorium. So it seems like some sort
of filling is happening. It doesn't seem like you're
just getting this like really sparse thing. So the
free energy principle basically works with these ideas and
it's in some ways, it's, um, I think these
intuitions, you don't even need to talk about the
energy principle now, like where we're at in terms
of things like, um, you know, transformers or current
space space models like like the current like like
place where more generative AI. The idea is basically,
um, Uh your experience like this competition like what
a consciousness generator would be, would potentially be the
entailment of some sort of generative model or if
we get some devils and details like who I
call it like an energy-based model, but still, the
idea being that like, um, the way that like,
for instance, like a, a deep fake, like you're
like filling in like pixel arrays on a screen
like to show you like an image, the idea
is that basically The If you look at what
the biophysics is doing and and you and you
find the right course screening to look at the
right tracking structures, it will entail a kind of
computation, which could be thought of as the inversion
of a generative model or the output of an
energy-based model, but that basically This fill like the
same way like you look at these images that
don't exist. Like your experience is basically being computed
by biophysics in that way. Instead of filling in
a pixel array, you're filling in all of your
modalities in different combinations at any given moment. And
that basically you could say like, um, like, you
know, you are a deep fake, like you are
a strangely deep fake, being filled in all these
different ways. From moment to moment and that basically
what people might have been looking for for the
hard problem and I think I have a couple
of options we might actually be quite close to
is some sort of computational description. Of biophysics, where
you say, yep, that there is the quality generator.
That there is the thing which can account for
a stream of experience, to what it feels like
in all of the particular fields. And so the
free energy principle I've worked with is in terms
of like Looking for this mapping to probability theory
and machine learning, but you can also just go
straight to probability learning, uh, probability theory machine learning.
You can say like, you know, we basically are
in possession now, I believe, of a set of
architectures and a lexicon and, and we have like
an algorithmic abstraction layer that's rich enough that I
think like, basically like the hard problem is it's,
it's on the ropes. I think it's just like
a matter of like, we just kind of like
I like shove it around a bit, give it
a hug, and then like have a few more
conversations. I wouldn't be surprised actually if this like,
like seemingly impenetrable mystery. If we just remembered that
we had bodies. And then we found like what's
the explanation we're looking to explain. Like, for me,
it's, I'm trying for conscious, I'm trying to explain
what I focus on is why is it that
the world appears to me with a live body
at its center. And for me, that's the core
explanator, but And the hard problem. And so that
is these various theories we're all pointing the way.
And so right now I'm basically struggling with having
like, um, I need to learn more about modern,
like the latest advances in machine learning. But like,
I think we're basically close to this is, I
know it's a crazy claim, but like, to basically
nailing down the computational object, that is the quality
generator and being able to say, here it is.
You know, in the language of like what we
transformers or current space space models, maybe some reservoir
computing in there for kicks, some geometric deep point,
like, here's how it is done that you could
get something computationally that does. Gives me experience machine.
And then here's how the biophysics does it. And
now we account for the core features of our
phenomenology. And you know, it just depends, you know,
and just, you know, both like the generation of
this lived body. Move on to things like um
like time consciousness, we then like include like richer
dynamic perspectives and maybe get the hippocampal system into
the loop that's a whole other story. But like,
and this like we, I think we're actually close
to being able to talk about these things where
the enduring problems of consciousness. Um, MIGHT just start
to be, um, sensible, and we can start to,
um, actually, uh, do a new kind of psychology
and engineering and AI about it.
So you mentioned AI there, uh, would this approach
to consciousness also apply to AI?
I believe so. And I believe actually the current
debates about AI, um, needed to be informed by
richer understandings of consciousness. And right now, I think
a lot of the thought leaders in AI need
to be more patient and read more widely on
theories of consciousness because right now it's sort of
like they're engaging with like theories as they were
like so like Hinton, for instance, is just like
a Dennettian and I don't think that's adequate for
actually like being able to reason about what a
language model could do. It's just saying like Dennett
was right about consciousness, nothing to see here, folks.
Or for instance, like Benjio, like he's doing some
like really interesting like global workspace, um, ideas and
like connecting that to dynamics, but even then it's
like, um, I just think we need more details
to be able to talk about this in the
right way. Um. And we're just not having the
right kinds of conversations because no one's being patient
enough. But the answer to your question is yes,
I think actually, um, even though intelligence and consciousness
are separable, Um, in principle, in practice, they're not.
And in practice, um, consciousness is, depending on how
you want to define intelligence is immensely powerful for
as a means of extending the capabilities of a
cybernetic system of an intelligent goal seeking system. Like
if you have like, like, let's say you have
like an agent in the world trying to realize
it's a Value, it's semantic. INFORMATION for itself and
To basically have like this moment to moment estimation
of A field of experience that has some things
in the foreground and background based on like um
affordance potential and history of salience and gives you
like a compositionality where you can track things and
assign things. It's OK, this thing is here, this
thing's there, this thing is more important, this thing's
less important, cloud of affordances like this is like
just very useful for the um being intelligent with
respect to the goal of surviving. And or the
goal of autonomy. And so like, um, I currently
like also in conversation like, um, actually people from
the US Air Force who are actually, they're looking
to, um, you should probably talk to Kevin at
some point. They're actually, um, he's less ramply than
I am. Um, THEY'RE looking to, um, basically, uh,
he's also a guest center on these special issues
that I'm organizing at Royal Society, um, on AI
capabilities and the nature of also the nature of
consciousness. But like, they're looking to basically, um, Create
artificialquaa for the purpose of creating next-generation warfighters. It's
like that's actually their mandate. And so, um, dual
use technologies, you know, it's scary stuff, but the
idea is like, is consciousness related to intelligence? Yes.
Is it functional? Yes. The other way I would
say is with respect to something like System 2
AI. Like, you know, again, we, we run into
the issue of like multiple uses of consciousness and
which ones we're talking about. Are we talking about
phenomenal consciousness or conscious functions and conscious functions of
what kind. But this idea of like, agents and
what we're looking for in these systems like We're
looking for basically a system that can plan with
depth into the future, explore counterfactuals and coherent ways,
and being able to be like flexibly pivot and
remember and like self-reflect like. All these things would
be related to some things like we might say
as conscious functions in the sense of things like
meta-awareness, metacognition. Um, AND so that's a whole other
way in which consciousness studies, as diverse as it
is, is relevant to AI. And so, like, I
think so we'll get like, oftentimes like, you know,
a kind of like sneering dismissal like from people
like Hinton of like the relationship between like consciousness
and intelligence, and I think that's completely inappropriate. I
just, it's wrong. Um, IT'S, it's actually an embarrassment
of riches. The problem is, there's actually too many
ways in which consciousness is related to intelligence. There's
an important point there in that there is a
separability and that you can get very high degrees
of intelligence without consciousness, and that's the important point
to be made. Um, BUT, and the claim that
I would make is that though if you're looking
for something like artificial general intelligence, something like a
Um, and we can get into like argue about
what we mean by general, but still something that's
like us, that can do the range of things
we can do and more a a lifelong learner
capable of navigating and guiding themselves and others in
a world of this kind inhabited by agents like
us. I think we're going to need something like
consciousness to bring that one home. And I think,
um, uh, we might actually be um in some
ways closer than we think to getting there, but
not with the current approaches.
Right, but do you think that AI would need
to be embodied in any way if it were
to develop consciousness, for example?
Yes, it would need at the very least a
rich virtual body. And so there's right now, one
of the companies I mentioned is actually starting to
like simulate virtual embodiments for artificial life agents. They
are basically of increasing degrees of sophistication and giving
them neural networks for rich like bodies modeled with
rich physics and teroceptive states exteroceptive states. And all
the ways that like, for instance, bodies play into
this. I have this one paper, um, uh, forgive
the title, the radically embodied cybernetic, uh, basing brain
from free energy to free will and back again.
I try to lay out like what I think
like embodied cognition means. And so one of the
things is like, um, uh, I, I think actually
the body provides, um, a certain type, it has
many features, but it allows for a certain type
of learning curriculum that makes us extremely data efficient
and allows us to engage in the process, process
of, um, structure learning of a world model, of
a system world model that if you bootstrap off
of a valuing body, you get many things for
free. And you, you actually need them to handle
things like, like, like, um, the, the frame problem
and to handle things like, like, um. IMPOVERISHED stimuli,
it gives you um But yes, uh, I, I
personally think, uh, there's no. Sidestepping, not just embodiments,
but actually I think fairly rich embodiments and embodiments
that actually, um, require Uh, certain types of informational
closure. With a certain kinds of tightness that basically
Situates you in the world. As an actor, as
a cause, among other causes, engaging with physics. And
being able to model the physics and the causation
of your own body and the other bodies around
you. And that's the kind of embodiment we need
to actually have symbols be grounded and actually have
systems that can actually have robust inference and don't,
um, like we're all confabulation engines, but confabulations that
don't like, um, Uh, basically we, we, we trust
them up to the point. I mean, this is,
I guess obviously so we trust them about the
point of catastrophe where like they just don't make
any sense at all. You're in like a cursed
AI world, they start just like, like, like sore
on these other things like you go for long
term coherence and they just start getting weird on
you. And you know, it happens to us to
some degrees, but actually like, but, but it doesn't
like we know something's off when you look at
like this Gen AI like it's impressive if you
look at like these short snippets. But the ability
to actually like get to um Yeah, the ability
to like Actually look, actually have a system that
can, you could trust. To account for the causes
of the world, to model them, to predict them,
to make decisions based on them in coherent ways.
I think actually you need to have a system
that is bootstrapped off of its body in a
certain way. And so we're seeing, you know, I
don't know how much of it's overhyped, but we're
seeing this like revolution robotics right now, you know,
so just like for instance, do like multimodal AI,
that's not going to be enough. I don't think
it has to be itself a cause in the
world. It has to be its own acting agent.
And so maybe robotics gets us there, but then
the question is how close are we to having
robots of sufficient capabilities that they could actually um
give you like the data you need. To basically
engage in the kind of learning you would need
to train up a system world model. And so,
um, one of the, one of the companies I'm
looking into is actually applied AI company for elder
care, and there's an interest in going into robotics
and also developmental robotics and actually like exploring that.
But this other company that is getting going is,
um, it's in a life. AI simulation platform and
a video game company and like, uh, scientific benchmarking
like place-based system that basically creating these AI agents
of increasing sophistication where they actually have, um, uh,
rich rich bodies, but, um, they're in a, um,
a 2D environment. And so it's like easy to
implement them, but you can still get like a
lot of the physics and principles going and it's
a way of doing it in a way that's
like, um, compute efficient. But still like, um, it's
not clear how far you can get with it.
We're also exploring like 3D options, but basically like,
um, seeing how far we can get with basically,
um, rich virtual embodiments that actually get the richness
of the kinds of bodies that we have. That's
Mhm.
So, so, uh, let me just uh change topics
now because I am also looking at the time.
So, um, tell us about the work you've been
doing on psychedelics, how it relates, how it relates
to your other research interests, and I mean, start
by telling us what psychedelics are.
So Um, Again, I'll go, I might verge a
little postmodern in terms of it's always like, um,
which psychedelic in which context. And so like part
of the work is like, um. Uh, WHAT'S the
diversity range of like psychedelic phenomena, but still the
through line also among all the psychedelics, or rather
the, the clustering like classic psychedelics. Um, Psilocybin, LSD,
the ones that tend to generate like mystic experiences
reliably of a kind that um for many people
are life transformative. Um So those I've done most
of my work so far focusing on that class
of psychedelics and their mechanisms for how they might
work, and I just published a paper on Albus
or altered Beliefs Under Psychedelics. It's kind of a
response paper to an earlier theory called Rebus, relaxed
beliefs under Psychedelics by Robin Harris and Carl Frisson.
And it's basically trying to take on those ideas
and basically iterate on them and like embed them
and like, um, basically. Apply more principles from um
uh. From basically added more details to try to
make a more comprehensive theory. But for psychedelics, so
like in terms of like, I guess in terms
of the use of language is some uh what
it says in the tin of like, um, psychedelic
or mind manifesting. Um, SO like there's these compounds
that allow, um, uh, when they're ingested or produced
endogenously in some way, you know, whether like heavy
breathing, potentially even like endogenous DMT, um, basically alters
your consciousness, your experience in a way that's notable.
And oftentimes it's it's not just your, your what
is altered by your consciousness. Usually it's both like
things like not just like, like the dream-like character
of it, the vividness, the detail, but also your
sense of self and the relationship to the world.
And so basically, a changing in the um nature
of uh Your call, like in terms of like,
you know, usually, um, not always like an increasing
of like vividness and texturing in detail, things are
manifesting more readily and an alteration of yourself and
relation to the world. That seems to be like
one of the core things that like makes them
so powerful. It's like you're experiencing something very intensely,
but you are different and now everything's different. And
so now that's like part of how it's like
so meaningful to people and so beautiful to people.
And so it's such an opportunity, as you can,
you, you have this thing which can um change,
which can like basically ah anneal you or or
or or canalize you differently. Like it's like so
there's some models like an opening of a critical
window. Um, AND it can also just, um, or
also just in the moment though, it can let
you like by like, cranking like the, like turbocharging
the, the turbo code by like cranking the gas
on consciousness, you can like reach states that like
you couldn't reach otherwise and have like peak experiences
and flow experiences you might have otherwise. And this
seems to be like the range of things we're
trying to account for, we're trying to count for
psychedelics. And so in the papers I've been working
on over the years, um, I've been trying to
say, OK, Using these like multiple perspectival, um, informed
by like biology and computer science approaches, how can
we make sense of these range of phenomena? What
neural systems we have to look to, what computational
principles do we need? And so that would be
the Shape of that.
Mhm. But do we have a good understanding of
their mechanisms of action in the brain and do
we understand neuroscientifically how they produce, for example, mystic
experiences and the other kinds of mental experiences uh
that are a result of their uh
consumption. Um, I guess it depends like how ambitious
we are and like how much we're trying to
explain. So it's like, and and also I guess
like the It's like the question we is interesting.
Actually, like, I feel like like academia is like,
it's failed so much on its own terms, and
like, we're always like talking past each other so
much and no one's listening to each other. I
like, I don't even know if there's a we.
Like even me, like, for instance, like you're getting
ready for this interview, I was like, I had
to like reread my own papers to be like,
wait, which thing do we have to dig into
now? So, but, but so I, so I think
it's like, um, uh, I think that you're getting
like, like, which is what I love about you
like, you always get the deepest question, and I,
I think we can, we can. Get at some
aspects of this experiences to some degree. Um, HOW
satisfying it is, I'm not sure. But, um, Yeah.
So how close are we to that? So basically,
I give it my best shots in this like
recent paper that just came out in neuroscience of
consciousness of like, you know, I'm not claiming to
have like accounted for all the things, but I
was like, OK, so like, uh, so let's say
like, we tried like really freaking hard for a
long time. Here's what it might look like to
try to make a dent in it. And so
I do like approach it so like the the
dream-like character, the alterations of selfhood. What it's like
with like different like levels of substance ingestion and
why, based on like different like neuroscientific details and
seeing if a coherent account could be there, but
you have to unfold details like, it's a long
conversation and it has to be like, you have
to talk about things like, OK, is there a
common cortical algorithm or not? Like, you know, going
back to Mountcastle and Jeff Hawkins and all these
ideas of like, you know, prediction memory frameworks and
then, you know, hypredictive coding, OK. And now how
might psychedelics impact that? And also, how, how might
we need to complexify that story because that's on
account of account of subjective experience. So now we
need to start to unfold theories of consciousness. And
wait, now we're talking about, wait, psychedelic cognition and
like the way like the psychoommimetic paradigm and the
ways in which like, um to be like a
trend, like one of the interests of psychedelics like
I guess back in the 50s was like giving
psychiatrists more like empathy for like their psychotic patients.
And so there's like transient psychosis quality. OK, so
now we're talking about cognition. So now we're not
just talking about quality generators. We're talking about things
like mental time travel, the nature of subjective time,
the nature of like, um, imagination, and it's your
ability to distinguish imagination from reality. And then, you
know, so now you have to do like really
complex systems neuroscience, and then it just gets, you
know, And so I, I, I do my best,
like in this paper to like Try to accomplish
such things and that I had to leave a
lot on the cutting room floor, but the, um,
I think we are actually quite close. I think
it's, it's, it's, you know. I I don't know
if it's, it's satisfying enough for like a meal.
Yeah, I want more, but it's like enough, it's
like, uh. Yeah, maybe, and keep going. Like I,
I wouldn't say like, um, We're at like fully
satisfying explanations. And I also like always feel like,
I always feel actually kind of like weird about
it because it's like, like approaching it with the
scientific instrument. I feel like it's like, there's like
a duty to do so because it's like, you
know, we have to get these details right because
like, these these are medical interventions. This is like
these are deep threads into like microscopes for mind,
like, you know, like uh that was part of
like the psychedelic center at Hopkins, like the hope
was we would, you know, Understand the secrets of
consciousness by studying psychedelics and I think there is
something there to it in terms of like, in
like constructing these theories they have to like call
shots and like it really like a lot of
things are revealed like, like core like cruxes and
issues. But like also there's like uh an element
of like humanity and spirit and like verbal overshadowing
and like scientism and like, like overreaching and it's
like. Like there's like, there's also a sense in
which these are sacred things to people and you
know and like very meaningful and it's like the
way you talk about them also matters. I know,
so it's like um Yeah they're not like, yeah,
it's like the theories are not like possessions to
like, like put on your shelf and be like,
yeah, I did it, it's like. Anyway, so, um,
I think progress is being made by us, more
progress will be made by us if we listen
to each other better. Um, AND I think there's
some satisfaction, um, but I continue to be dissatisfied.
So. I'm sorry, this is
OK, then let me ask you a different kind
of question. What are the modern applications of psychedelics?
It seems like the main places where they are
being explored at the moment. Primarily would be, I
guess, um, you know, on the streets in the
homes in the underground is like where most of
it's happening. It's just everyone using their own, you
know, parties, but then Um, It's the next place
to mention, just I guess maybe as a matter
of principle would be, you know, the, the deep
history of psychedelics and things like connections to like
shamanism and places where like, it's still involved in
people's cultures like, um, I was on a ayahuasca
retreat not too long ago at this place called
the Temple of Way of Light, and they try
to like preserve like the tradition of psychedelics and
man, that was rough. Um THERE was um I'm
still recovering. Um, THERE was a Might be part
of why this is a slightly chaotic interview. I'm
sorry. Oh, the um Uh, there's also the ways
in which, you know, I would argue I guess
the next one also as a matter of principle.
Um, I'm working on like a paper with um
Sue Carter on trying to like explore like, um,
endogenous psychedelic states and we're exploring whether like, for
instance, like, Um, connections between social peptide and psychedelic
mechanisms with the idea that basically, um, uh, sex,
orgasm, birthing, like these might have in some sense
has been like the original psychedelic states, um, maybe
also like near-death experiences, um. I just don't know,
like If you got to that point Like, could
you have enough like selective pressure from that as
a source because like in nature, it's like you,
you're almost dead, or you're probably dead. But still,
you know, it's not a really, it's not a
contest, but it is like near death experience. I
just don't know quite how to think about them
is like, how much selection came from that. But
it's like, let's say you almost died, or like
you came close, that might be or you're coming
close. That's a whole other conversation. But basically, um,
psychedelics, I would say like, we enter into psychedelic
states almost in like a, like a stoned ape
theory. I'm working on a paper on that with
Mat Johnson of like, like part of human uniqueness
is like we're like a psychedelic ape, and we're
moving in and out of like. STATES to different
degrees, maybe including things like, you know, hyperventilation, carbon
dioxide, agonizes the 5 HC2A receptor or potentiates it
endogenous DMT or just like states of neurosynchrony, moving
in and out of like alterations of consciousness and
self-consciousness. And then finally, uh, I will say I
don't like, like I'll say medicine just because like
the state of it is rough, like places like
Hopkins, like they're doing great work in terms of
like these interventions potentially can like save people's lives.
Like you give someone a mystic experience and like,
it'll be one of like 5, top 5 most
meaningful experiences in a person's life and it could
like turn things around, overcoming addiction, overcoming like depression,
those things that like have plagued them as like,
like born again experiences. And, um, and so, you
know, I don't want to like, like, I, I
just put a last because like these other things
I think are kind of like too like they're
weird and neglected, and I think they provide an
important backstory. But I, but, but there, there's an
immense promise there. Uh, I guess the um reason
I might put less, I feel like that, um,
endeavor is doing just fine on its own and
might, um, uh, uh, I think maybe could benefit
from getting a little bit weirder and um maybe
incorporating like things like, uh, um, uh, self-compassion and
like and like, like other elements in terms of
like the way they approach the questions and also
they have an issue of like, they don't have
a business model for scaling it. Because like this,
it's just like, um, so hard to like, uh,
like it costs so much to do like an
eight hour like psilocybin session, like a doctor on
call. Like I was trying to do a study
at one point and I was like I had
this $900,000 grant. I was like, I've never seen
so much money and I was like, that's not
pilot data. It was like nothing. So, so how
do you actually scale this like heal people? Like
what's the model of healing? So you could do
like a group therapy thing and maybe like scale
it that way. There's some interesting things that are
happening with um uh short acting psychedelic compounds that
people are engineering that might change that. So it's
like someone could have like an like an MDMA
like, like ecstasy like thing, and like it lasts
only for an hour. And then like, maybe like
the mainstream medicine effort will like be more relevant
to helping more people. But right now it's kind
of like it's very interesting, promising cutting edge research
happening in this medical context. And I guess the
final one, which is something I'm working on is
this I'm trying to uh basically this actually going
to relate to the, the video game project is
something called psychedelic machine learning, which I know sounds
like it's like a sensational thing, but it's not.
The idea is like, like, if part of what
makes systems intelligent, well, one, if like part of
like ways of interpreting psychedelics is like changing the
states of consciousness and self and if self and
consciousness are both functional. Then you can think of
psychedelic mechanisms as in cybernetic terms, as order parameters,
control parameters, they have functional significances. And so if
you talk about like psychedelics modifying you to imagine
differently, to dream differently, like, um, so for instance,
like with respect to uh like a like a,
like a driverless car, you're going to change lanes,
you do like a roll out into the future
like what would happen if I switched lanes? How
vivid is that imagining, how creative you get? Or
like when you take it back to the Tesla
dojo and you're looking for like the edge cases
and you're doing the dreaming, like, what's the nature
of the dreaming? How weird do you get? You
know, so the idea is like psychedelics basically in
multiple ways can inform machine learning both through neuro
AI and through some of the problems that are
addressed in AI like, um, making for flexible learning,
imaginative systems, uh, um, On simulate parameterizing simulation slash
like offline learning, and, and then potentially being like
a virtuous cycle where this machine learning interpretation of
psychedelics actually gives you a coherent way of talking
about it, which I guess in a way brings
us full spiral back to like the approach of
consciousness. IS this idea of going for like a
virtuous cycle, like Dennis Save actually talked about this
really well in a 2017 paper of a virtuous
cycle between like neuroscience and machine learning, of like
each one is forming the other and keeping you
grounded. So it's like, you can do better neuroscience
from like the machine learning lens, and then the
machine learning lens. And then like the neuroscience lens
like gives you ideas for machine learning. And so
same thing like psychedelic machine learning. I think there's
basically, um, an academic field that's about to take
root there. And I'm working with some people who
made that happen and for advance studies with paper
coming out, and also, um, then to actually try
to be, it's going to be part of the
research. So for instance, these a-life creatures like giving
them psychedelics. One more thing Mike Levin, Mike Levin,
uh, he also did really interesting work with like
generalized psychedelics in ways that they can parameterize morphogenesis,
like the, the development of like the, the phenotype
and the morphotype as a kind of inference process,
and then like what happens when you give drugs
to the embryo. And so there's all sorts of
like psychedelics. It's like it's, um, it's, it's it's
too rich, like all the ways like it it
applies to like, um, The mind sciences, it's like
the question is the problem I guess I generally
have is like, where do you begin? To have
like a coherent conversation about this and how can
like, we all be comfortable with getting as weird
as we need to be to actually talk to
the weirdness that is nature. And ourselves
Yeah, I understand. So let me ask you one
last question at a certain
point in your. I think you might be the
only person who understands.
Well, I, I don't think so. So. And anyway,
let me ask you one last question.
You understand better than I do, I think like
from all these conversations you've been having, like, I
can tell you some things.
Yeah, OK, so, uh, at a certain point there
you mentioned the self. So the psychedelic experiences relate
to the self in any way, and what is
the self, really?
So, yeah, I wouldn't place probably if you're looking
for a like unifying definition of psychedelics, you know,
not in terms of like what it is that's
manifesting in mind differently that makes us like find
notable, um. CHANGING in the quality of consciousness and
particularly self-consciousness. And so like, uh, and this being
part of what makes these experiences particularly notable in
their, um, the difference from other types of experiences
makes them meaningful in the ways they are and
potential, um, to be transformative. And so I guess
I would think of the self, um, I actually
have um a series of papers that just came
out, um, pre-prints, um, collaborator, uh, grad student at
Indiana University, Victoria Clama, and actually getting into like
the nature of selfhood with respect to like biotic
systems and AI and we have like a series
of three papers digging into specifically, um, This issue
of how we think of cell phone. But, you
know, once again, it's using the methods. It's um
I like Almost all the ways I've seen self
talked about. I like Dennett when he says it's
a center of narrative gravity. I like it like
when people talk about like minimal embodied selfhood. I
like it when like people like Jordan Peterson and
Colin de Young talk about selves as like cybernetic
controllers and like um types of data structures. Um,
YOU know, I also um like mystic perspectives on
selves that consider the ways that selves also have
to be non-self. Although I, I, I have actually
a book chapter coming out where I actually take
some aim at that, like, uh, pushing back against
people like Sam Harris, because I think actually self-illusionism
is wrong and dangerous. Uh, SELVES are quite real.
Um, THEY'RE terrifyingly real. They're also empty, but they're
also real. And so like, um, I think that's
sort of what Buddhists would generally say actually, um,
the, but Uh, there's some interesting, uh, work. Um,
SO for instance there's one person you might want
to talk to, um, has a paper on cell
phones, which I think you'll find interesting in terms
of like a through line. Um, I, I invited
them, I have to reach out to them as
like part of this collection of world I'm organizing,
and, um, they're they're also, I think collaborating with
Mike. And it's basically generalizations of the default mode
network across scales. And actually finding like analogs of
it going like, like in the hydra and actually
potentially, um, uh, and other systems like even like
plants or like potentially even individual cells, but a
kind of like, um, Uh a metastable, attracting structure,
uh metastable in terms of being at the edge
of chaos or like um poise the criticality that
allows basically, um, the system to you'll have like
a sensory motor interface, and then this basically, uh,
and some sort of inner salience type network, some
sort of evaluator of how good or bad it
is for the conditions of life. And then intermit
within them, this structure of, um, a model of
the system and its relationship to the world. And
it has certain properties usually they're interesting like it's,
it's, um, uh, seems to be important for it
to be like, um, flexible, but not too flexible
at the edge of chaos, poise has properties of
self-organized criticality. And, um, one of the things that
psychedelics do potentially is like they disrupt, among many
things is, um, the default mode network and allow
for different types of creative reconfigurations, change the nature
of the cyberne control allows you to break up
the old regime and explore new ones. And so,
um, if you're looking at things like generalized psychedelics,
um, basically for all systems like the self of
the system, the, the core features of it, um,
There's like some tractor network that has the ability
to autopoetically um And then that reconsiturate itself through
its inaction. And that um This system that it
can be potentially uh has connections to like basically
gives it coherence across time as it allows like
the past to inform the future for adaptive behavior
and that this structure, this attracting structure, it can
be too loose or it could be too rigid.
So like right now, for instance, coming off my
Ayalaska retreat, it might be a little too loose
right now, but like, um, it could also be
too rigid. And you might be stuck in like
a psychotic depressive state or just like a loveless
job or a loveless marriage just like annihilism, or
you can just be like locked into this perception
box and this one frame of things. And so
they, so, but for any system, it seems like
there's this essential inner tracking structure that defines it,
that allows you to say there's a system there
and that gives it coherence, gives it a coitus,
if you will, or, um, allows it to have
intention. Allows it to like basically buffer entropy and
be a be a cause in the world, be
a difference maker, and not just get like wiped
out by the second law and become maximally probable
and ground up in the meat grinder existence, like
something that it's something that that resists and climbs
gradients, but also gives and and integrates. So what
is the self It's like so many things and
there's like a it's just like, but there's also
a through line. And like, and I think language
is both like confusing and wise in terms of
like, there's a reason we have this these common
like words for these different things. And it's just
like we need to add a couple more words
when we're talking, which do we mean in which
context? And what's the interrelation of these different senses
for the different sides of the elephant. And so,
you know, what is self, what is consciousness. What's
intelligence, what is for all of us kind of
like that same term move. I'd say is needed,
so I'm going meta though instead of answering your
question. So.
Uh, YEAH, but look, if people are interested, where
can they find your work on the internet?
Um, SO if they're interested, um, I have a
poorly curated, um, YouTube channel that has a lot
of my workout videos or where I pray, um,
and work out my issues. Um, AND I have
a, I also have like a lot of conversations
with different people. Um, I'm about to put up
some new playlists there of like different like uh
interviews I've given, but, um, I guess maybe my
Google Scholar would be a good place to go,
or, um, Uh, I use Facebook as like a
kind of science journal, and I have like this
weird memory palace in there. Um, AND I sometimes
see the same thing with Twitter, um. And I
guess I'll start, I'm starting to use LinkedIn. So,
um, and I guess I have a website now
and Email also works. There's a via that website,
there's a submission form, but happy to talk to
people, um. Yeah, so probably my website that's getting
polished and those other standard places that people go
to find out about people. They're all, they're all
fine.
OK, great. So I'll be leaving some links to
that in the description of the interview and Adam,
thank you so much for taking the time to
come on the show. It's been fun to talk
to you.
Thank you so much and uh.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyches Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Mari Robert Windegaruyasi Zup Mark Nes called in Holbrookfield
governor Michael Stormir, Samuel Andre Francis Forti Agnseroro and
Hal Herzognun Macha Joan Labray and Samuel Corriere, Heinz,
Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David Sloan
Wilson, asilla dearauurumen Roach Diego London Correa. Yannick Punter
Darusmani Charlotte blinikolbar Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back medicine, Gary
Galman Sam of Zallirianeioltonin John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fre Francaortolotti Gabriel Ponscorteseus Slelitsky,
Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani Smith John Wieman. Daniel
Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai Giorgio Theophanous,
Chris Williamson, Peter Wozin, David Williams, Diocosta, Anton Eriksson,
Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, bungalow
atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, old Erringbo. Sterry Michael
Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassyigoren, Jeff McMann, Jake Zu,
Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris
Storry, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brandon,
Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman, Perrolis,
Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert, Liam Dunaway, BR Masoud
Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursula Gudinov, Gregory Hastings,
David Pinsoff, Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Net.
A special thanks to my producers. These are Webb,
Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden, Bernard Curtis Dixon,
Benedict Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, Gian
Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick Golden, and to
my executive producers Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets,
and Rosie. Thank you for all.